Add style guidance for release note types (#533)
redhat-documentation/supplementary-style-guide: supplementary_style_guide/style_guidelines/release-notes.adoc

* Do not expand abbreviations in headings. If you use an abbreviation in a heading, expand it on the first mention in the text below.
* Avoid definitions in headings unless necessary for clarity. For example, use definitions to disambiguate different meanings of the same name: "The `journald` system role can tune the performance of the `journald` service".
* Do not start the heading with a gerund. Use gerunds only for procedural content.
[[jira-links-release-notes]]
== Linking to Jira in release notes

> For customer reference, include links to Jira tickets on all _Known issues_  and _Fixed issues_ on the line directly after the entry. Do not place that link inside parenthesis or brackets. See examples later in this guidance.

Author: Added some more information so that products do not start to drift out of current practice. Needed some rephrasing, please feel free to adjust.

```suggestion
For customer reference, include links to Jira tickets on all _Known issues_  and _Fixed issues_. Some products provide ticket references for all release note types. Place the reference on the line directly after the entry, not inside parenthesis or brackets. See examples later in this guidance.
```

====

In addition to general style, follow these guidelines:

* Always provide information about a workaround in a separate paragraph:
** If a workaround exists, describe it in the following format:
+
To work around this problem, <workaround in imperative>.
** If no workaround is mentioned, investigate and try to describe how to avoid or partially mitigate the problem. If there is no workaround or mitigation, explicitly say: “No known workaround exists.”
* Use the present tense.
* If the known issue applies only to specific batch updates (z-streams), clarify that. For example, the known issue might exist from 4.14.0 to 4.14.4 but not 4.14.5 onwards.
* Never promise future fixes. Avoid making claims that are related to a future release; do not announce a new component will replace a deprecated one until it is released.
* For customer reference, include Jira tickets links to all Known issues on the line directly after the entry. Do not place that link inside parenthesis or brackets.
** If you link to private tickets, inform the user that some Jira tickets might require login credentials, for example: “Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

> ** If you refer to private tickets without a link, inform the user, for example: “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is private.”

Author: ```suggestion
** If you refer to private tickets without a link, inform the user, for example: “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is accessible only with Red Hat credentials.”
```

* Avoid definitions in headings unless necessary for clarity. For example, use definitions to disambiguate different meanings of the same name: "The `journald` system role can tune the performance of the `journald` service".
* Do not start the heading with a gerund. Use gerunds only for procedural content.

> 

Reviewer: I thought we wanted the link guidance here, but I also see it in the known issues, section. If we want this earlier as well, instead of me sending my fork up, I will just add it here:

```suggestion
[[jira-links-release-notes]]
== Linking to Jira in release notes

For customer reference, include links to Jira tickets on all _Known issues_  and _Fixed issues_ on the line directly after the entry. Do not place that link inside parenthesis or brackets. See examples later in this guidance.

Inform the user that some Jira tickets might require login credentials. For example, write the following in the introduction of your _Known issues_ or _Fixed issues_:

“Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

If you refer to those tickets without a link, inform the user. See the following example:

“Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is not accessible without Red Hat credentials."

```

== Release note types and chapters

Each release note is defined by a specific type based on the information it provides to customers. In Jira tickets, the type is defined in the *Release Note Type* field.

> In a release note document, each release note type is presented in a specific chapter. Do not use other chapter names for these release note types.

Author: I don't get this, rebases are explicitly listed here. CVEs is the only missing RN type that we don't cover (other than, technically, `None`, `Unspecified Release Note Type - Unknown`, and `Release Note Not Required`). What did you mean by this?

> In a release note document, each release note type is presented in a specific chapter. Do not use other chapter names for these release note types.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I was thinking about the "Breaking changes" and "Developer preview" questions that we got. Should we include this sentence and add one of those an example? We can just skip it.

> In a release note document, each release note type is presented in a specific section. Do not use other section names for these release note types.

Reviewer 3: Unless one needs to consult their DPM or CS? Exceptions could exist.

> In a release note document, each release note type is presented in a specific chapter. Do not use other chapter names for these release note types.

Author: I think it's out of scope here. We can mention it in the template.

|Known issue |Known issues
|Bug fix |Fixed issues
|===

Every release note type has a template, which is pre-filled in many Jira projects, and that engineers fill in to provide the required information. The writer then rewrites that information into a customer-readable *release note text* (RN text). You can use standard connecting phrases, for example, “As a result,” for results. Sometimes, the information is better presented by changing the order of the pieces of information, for example, a consequence before the cause, or combining them into a single sentence.

=== New features and enhancements

New features are new functions, and enhancements are improvements to existing functions. The release notes for both types are similar, and you can group them together in a single chapter, or they can be separate.

.New feature and enhancement engineering template
----
Feature, enhancement – describe the feature or enhancement from the user's point of view
Reason – why has the feature or enhancement been implemented
Result – what is the current user experience
----

.New feature and enhancement release note text
====
_<Heading that summarizes the enhancement or feature>_::

> _<Feature, enhancement>_. _<Reason>_. As a result, _<result>_.

Author: All of these phrases are presented as optional, see line 84 above:

> You can use standard connecting phrases, for example, “As a result,” for results.

+

> For more information, see _<link_to_product_docs>_.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth keeping for a later discussion point, but the DITA migration plan mentions stripping out lead-in sentences for links.

+
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

In addition to general style, follow these guidelines:

* Describe why the feature or enhancement benefits the customer or why it is required.
* Add a link to the product documentation for the feature, if it exists.
* When a previous Technology Preview changes to full support, make this information clear. Use text similar to these examples:

> ** _<Feature>_, previously available as a Technology Preview, is fully supported from RHEL X.Y.

Author: I think "in previous versions" might work better, WDYT?

```suggestion
** _<Feature>_, available as a Technology Preview before this update, is fully supported from RHEL X.Y.
```

** _<Feature>_, introduced in RHEL X.Y as a Technology Preview, is fully supported with this release.

.Examples of new features and enhancements release notes
====
Cluster API replaces Terraform for VMware vSphere installations::
In OpenShift Container Platform 4.16, the installation program uses Cluster API instead of Terraform to provision cluster infrastructure during installations on VMware vSphere.
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

====
New packages: keylime::
RHEL 9.1 introduces Keylime, a tool for attestation of remote systems, which uses the trusted platform module (TPM) technology. With Keylime, you can verify and continuously monitor the integrity of remote systems. You can also specify encrypted payloads that Keylime delivers to the monitored machines, and define automated actions that trigger whenever a system fails the integrity test.

> See Ensuring system integrity with Keylime in the RHEL 9 Security hardening document for more information.

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html-single/security_hardening/index#assembly_ensuring-system-integrity-with-keylime_security-hardening[Ensuring system integrity with Keylime] in the RHEL 9 _Security hardening_ document.
```

RHELPLAN-92522
====

====
The Template Sync plugin supports using an HTTP proxy to connect to a repository::
You can use an HTTP proxy to synchronize templates between your Satellite server and a git repository. Configuring an HTTP proxy for template synchronization ensures that Satellite routes the Template Sync request to the repository through the specified proxy server.
For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_satellite/6.17/html-single/administering_red_hat_satellite/index#Synchronizing_Templates_Repositories_admin[Synchronizing template repositories] in _Administering Red Hat Satellite_.
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SAT-27349[SAT-27349]
====

=== Rebases
A rebase is an enhancement in which the version of a component increases. Versions are typically presented in the following format:

> X.Y.Z-A.elN, where X.Y.Z is version, A is build, and elN stands for Enterprise Linux version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
X.Y.Z-A.elN, where `X.Y.Z` is version, `A` is build, and `elN` stands for Enterprise Linux version
```

+
For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.17/html-single/storage/#csi-drivers-supported_persistent-storage-csi[CSI drivers supported by OpenShift Container Platform] and link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.17/html-single/storage/#csi-volume-snapshots[CSI volume snapshots].
+
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

====
System-wide post-quantum cryptography is available through `crypto-policies-pq-preview` (Technology Preview)::
The `TEST-PQ` subpolicy contained in the new `crypto-policies-pq-preview` package provides system-wide post-quantum cryptography (PQC) as a Technology Preview. You can enable PQC by switching to the TEST-PQ subpolicy and restarting the system, for example:
+
----
# update-crypto-policies --set DEFAULT:TEST-PQ
# reboot
----
+
Note that all PQC algorithms in RHEL 10 are provided as a Technology Preview feature. The package and system-wide cryptographic policy name are subject to change when post-quantum cryptography exits Technology Preview.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-58241[RHEL-58241]
====

=== Deprecated features

> Deprecated features are supported but will be removed in a future version. Deprecating a feature is a signal to customers that they should not use the feature for new deployments.

Author: Normally I would agree with you, we shouldn't use should, but in this context "must" is too strong.

Category:: Shows what is impacted by the deprecation, for example, Installation. This can be a header for the table, or a column in your table.
Feature or component:: Provides the specific feature or component.
Version:: Shows when the feature is first deprecated. Keep that version in the table until the feature moves to your list or table of removed features.
Alternative action:: Directs the user to another solution.
More information:: If you do not describe alternative actions, link to documentation, and so on in a separate release note, this column guides the user to the alternative feature or component.

Follow these guidelines for the deprecation and removal tables:

* For scannability, reduce the number of columns and rows to only what is needed.
* Avoid overly long descriptions in tables. Aim for between 3 and 11 words. Link to documentation if more information is needed.
* Avoid blank cells in a table. Define a status, such as “Not available”, to represent that a feature did not exist in a release.
* Make sure that markup is displayed correctly in table cells, for example, `arm64`.

> * See the following example tables that you can use for deprecations and removals:

Reviewer 2: The removal table is at the end of the next section. I'd rewrite this bullet to: 

- See the following example table for deprecations:

> * See the following example tables that you can use for deprecations and removals:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* See the following example table that you can use for deprecations and removals:
```

* If a small part of a feature is removed, treat that as a feature change, not a removed feature. Focus on why the change was made and what replaces the removed item. 

.Examples of removed feature release notes
====
`scap-workbench` is removed::
The `scap-workbench` package is removed in RHEL 10. The `scap-workbench` graphical utility performed configuration and vulnerability scans on a single local or remote system. As an alternative, you can scan local systems for configuration compliance by using the `oscap` command and remote systems by using the `oscap-ssh` command. For more information, see link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/10/html/security_hardening/scanning-the-system-for-configuration-compliance#configuration-compliance-scanning[Configuration compliance scanning].
+
RHELDOCS-19009
====

====
Service Binding Operator documentation removed::
With this release, the documentation for the Service Binding Operator (SBO) has been removed because this Operator is no longer supported.
+
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

If your product presents deprecations and removals in a table, follow the guidance for deprecation tables.

> * Remove the entry from the table when the release for that removal is no longer fully supported. Typically that means a removal is not carried on beyond n-2 versions of the product documentation.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence is a little confusing the way that it's currently worded. How about this instead? 

> Typically you do not need to include a removal in the release notes beyond n-2 versions of the product documentation.

Or maybe:
> Typically you do not need to include a removal in the release notes for more than n-2 versions of the product documentation.

.Example table of removed features 
|===
|Category |Feature or component |Version |Alternative action |More information

|Application management |Subscriptions |2.5 |Use GitOps for |See _<insert_link_to_GitOps>_ for more details.
|===

=== Known issues

> Known issues are existing problems that customers should be aware of to mitigate them and avoid unnecessary reporting.

Reviewer 2: This is awkward wording that I noticed particularly as I read the file. How about this instead?

> Known issues describe existing problems that customers should be aware of, so that they can mitigate them and avoid unnecessary reporting.

Author: ```suggestion
Known issues describe existing problems that customers should be aware of, so that they can mitigate them and avoid unnecessary reporting.
```

====

In addition to general style, follow these guidelines:

* Always provide information about a workaround in a separate paragraph:
** If a workaround exists, describe it in the following format:
+
To work around this problem, <workaround in imperative>.
** If no workaround is mentioned, investigate and try to describe how to avoid or partially mitigate the problem. If there is no workaround or mitigation, explicitly say: “No known workaround exists.”
* Use the present tense.
* If the known issue applies only to specific batch updates (z-streams), clarify that. For example, the known issue might exist from 4.14.0 to 4.14.4 but not 4.14.5 onwards.
* Never promise future fixes. Avoid making claims that are related to a future release; do not announce a new component will replace a deprecated one until it is released.
* For customer reference, include Jira tickets links to all Known issues on the line directly after the entry. Do not place that link inside parenthesis or brackets.
** If you link to private tickets, inform the user that some Jira tickets might require login credentials, for example: “Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

> ** If you refer to private tickets without a link, inform the user, for example: “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is private.”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** If you refer to tickets without a link, tell the user, for example: “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that is visible only to Red Hat employees.”
```

> ** If you link to private tickets, inform the user that some Jira tickets might require login credentials, for example: “Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

Reviewer: @jafiala we chatted a while back and I thought we decided not to use the word private? See how I have added this to the beginning. Maybe we can use similar language? We say "private" here 3 times. I am happy to change it. :-)

See this: https://github.com/redhat-documentation/supplementary-style-guide/pull/533/files#r2265591358

Author: Removed one occurrence of "private" in customer facing text, thanks for bringing this up.

* Before a release, always check the status of all known issues. If a previously identified known issue is fixed, the customer must be informed in a product-consistent way, for example:
** A _Fixed issues_ release note contains a reference to the previous known issue.

> ** A _New features_ and enhancements release note announces fixes that cover multiple known issues and contains references to those issues.

Reviewer 4: We might want to add these guidelines to the respective release note types. E.g. a writer documenting the Fixed issues would need this guideline to provide reference to any known issue vs someone trying to document the Known issue.

Author: Good point, but these are just examples of what individual products can do, and not general guidance. See line 412.

+
SAT-23881
====

=== Fixed issues
Fixed issues, also called “bug fixes”, list problems that are resolved in the current release.

.Fixed issues engineering template
----
Cause – the user action or circumstance that triggered the bug, in the past tense.
Consequence – what the user experience was when the bug occurred, in the past tense.
Fix – what has changed to fix the bug; do not include overly technical details, in the present perfect or present simple tense.
Result – what happens now that the patch is applied, in the present tense.
----

.Fixed issues release note text
====
Heading that summarizes the fixed issue::
Before this update, _<cause>_. As a consequence, _<consequence>_. With this release, _<fix>_. As a result, _<result>_.
+
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

In addition to general style, follow these guidelines:

* Follow the Cause-Consequence-Fix-Result (CCFR) tense logic: “Before this update, a problem occurred. The current update has fixed the problem. As a result, the problem no longer occurs.”
Cause:: The user action or circumstance that triggered the bug, in the past tense.
Consequence:: What the user experience was when the bug occurred, in the past tense.

> Fix:: What has changed to fix the bug; do not include overly technical details, in the present perfect or present simple tense.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fix:: What has changed to fix the bug; do not include overly technical details; do not use the present perfect or present simple tense.
```

* Avoid definitions in headings unless necessary for clarity. For example, use definitions to disambiguate different meanings of the same name: "The `journald` system role can tune the performance of the `journald` service".
* Do not start the heading with a gerund. Use gerunds only for procedural content.

[[jira-links-release-notes]]

> == Linking to Jira in release notes

Author: Not all jira references are links - we discussed an unlinked jira number to be an acceptable reference to a private ticket.

```suggestion
== References to Jira in release notes
```

Category:: Shows what is impacted by the deprecation, for example, Installation. This can be a header for the table, or a column in your table.
Feature or component:: Provides the specific feature or component.
Version:: Shows when the feature is first deprecated. Keep that version in the table until the feature moves to your list or table of removed features.
Alternative action:: Directs the user to another solution.
More information:: If you do not describe alternative actions, link to documentation, and so on in a separate release note, this column guides the user to the alternative feature or component.

Follow these guidelines for the deprecation and removal tables:

* For scannability, reduce the number of columns and rows to only what is needed.
* Avoid overly long descriptions in tables. Aim for between 3 and 11 words. Link to documentation if more information is needed.
* Avoid blank cells in a table. Define a status, such as “Not available”, to represent that a feature did not exist in a release.
* Make sure that markup is displayed correctly in table cells, for example, `arm64`.

> * See the following example tables that you can use for deprecations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* See the following example table that you can use for deprecations:
```

====

In addition to general style, follow these guidelines:

* Always provide information about a workaround in a separate paragraph:
** If a workaround exists, describe it in the following format:
+
To work around this problem, <workaround in imperative>.
** If no workaround is mentioned, investigate and try to describe how to avoid or partially mitigate the problem. If there is no workaround or mitigation, explicitly say: “No known workaround exists.”
* Use the present tense.
* If the known issue applies only to specific batch updates (z-streams), clarify that. For example, the known issue might exist from 4.14.0 to 4.14.4 but not 4.14.5 onwards.
* Never promise future fixes. Avoid making claims that are related to a future release; do not announce a new component will replace a deprecated one until it is released.
* For customer reference, include Jira tickets links to all Known issues on the line directly after the entry. Do not place that link inside parenthesis or brackets.
** If you link to private tickets, inform the user that some Jira tickets might require login credentials, for example: “Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

> ** If you refer to private tickets without a link, inform the user, for example: “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is accessible only with Red Hat credentials.”

Author: These two bullets summarize the two approaches we've identified, mainly between what automated (acorns) and manual teams tend to do.

- In a manual process, all references to tickets are linked, public or not. When you click on a ticket and get a login prompt, you'll know it's private. This is “Some linked Jira tickets are accessible only with Red Hat credentials.” 

- In acorns, non-public tickets are automatically stripped of a link, so that when you see only a ticket number with no link (and a footnote), you know it's non-public. This is “Some referenced tickets are not linked. This means that the ticket is accessible only to Red Hat employees.”

It's not really reasonable to change either approach, because it would mean more load on either teams, so we decided to describe both approaches.

.Examples of known issue release notes
====
Inconsistent NVMe device names after reboot::
A new kernel feature that enables asynchronous NVMe namespace scans is introduced in RHEL 10 to accelerate NVMe disk detection. As a consequence of the asynchronous scans, the `/dev/nvmeXnY` device files might point to different namespaces after each reboot. This can lead to inconsistent device names.
+
No known workaround exists.
+
TICKET-REFERENCE
====

====
SELinux autorelabel in the Rescue Mode might cause reboot loop::
Accessing a file system in `rescue` mode triggers SELinux to autorelabel the file system on the next boot, which continues until SELinux runs in the `permissive` mode. Consequently, the system might go into an infinite loop of reboots after exiting the `rescue` mode because it cannot delete the `/.autorelabel` file.
+
To work around this problem, switch to the `permissive` mode by adding `enforcing=0` to the kernel command line on the next boot. The system displays a warning message. This message indicates that you might see this problem when accessing the file system in `rescue` mode.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-14005[RHEL-14005]
====

> ====
> When using `satellite-maintain` backup on Capsule Server, the certificate tar file is not collected::
> The `satellite-maintain` backup command does not collect the certificate tar file of the Capsule Server when creating a backup. As a result, restoring the archive fails.
> +
> To work around this problem, re-generate the certificate tar file from the Satellite Server.
> +
> SAT-23881
> ====

Author: Remove bad example
```suggestion
```
